# data_ethics_in_action

Supporting information for "Principles in practice: Activities for developing students’ ethical data dispositions." **Anne Patel**, **Liza Bolton**, and **Charlotte M. Jones-Todd**


## SA assessment question examples

  + The principles of open-source software and, in particular, open data mean that we as researchers can easily validate, replicate, and reproduce research. However, there are potential challenges that arise from balancing the ideals of open data with the need to ensure the ethical and culturally appropriate use of data. In your own words, briefly discuss these potential challenges and outline the existing strategies or standards developed in the context of Māori data sovereignty that aim to ensure we (as researchers) abide by the principles for ethical data management.
  + Algorithmic fairness is a term often used to refer to the concept of understanding and correcting biases inherent in modelling procedures. These biases typically exist due to the data considered which therefore form the basis upon which inference is then drawn. In your own words, briefly discuss the potential implications of inherent data biases in the context of statistical analysis using an example (real or hypothetical) to highlight the issue(s). You should also briefly discuss what steps might be taken to mitigate such biases.
  + The objective of Genome Wide Association Studies (GWAS) is to identify statistical associations between a set of genetic variants across different individuals with specific traits of interest. However, GWAS can be affected by genomic bias, which occurs when certain populations are over-represented in genetic studies, leading to an incomplete or skewed understanding of human genetic diversity.---Below is a plot from an interactive dashboard that monitors the diversity of participants across all published GWAS from 2005 to 2023. This time series plot shows the percentage of published GWAS in the discovery stage (looking at a total of 67171 unique diseases and traits) across ancestry samples.---In your own words, briefly comment on 1) whether you think this plot indicates genomic bias in the GWAS considered, and 2) what the implications and societal impact of genomic bias may be to the wider community.
  + Indigenous data governance refers to the principles by which Indigenous communities exercise control over their own data. The CARE principles emphasise that access to Indigenous data should be "as open as possible and as closed as necessary",  ensuring that this data is used for the "collective benefit" of the community. Similarly, the Tikanga framework for ethical data management includes a principle that encompasses Wairua | Community Good alongside principles that speak to balancing the benefits and risks of sharing and using  Indigenous data. In your own words, briefly discuss these principles, the data-usage practices they advocate, and the responsibilities, if any, we (as researchers) have to adhere to them. You may use any documented examples to support your discussion.

